[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neo.com
I'm your host Dylan Grabowski in today's
episode we sat down and spoke with Max
hillbrand the CEO of ZK snacks ZK snacks
is a velopment team dedicated to
building and implementing privacy
Solutions into the Bitcoin ecosystem in
this episode we spoke about how an
interest in sound economic models LED
Max to bitcoin privacy and scaling
concerns and solutions for Bitcoin the
cypherpunk ethos and the value of
open-source software Freedom of
Information the Privacy Solutions ZK
snacks and wasabi wallet provided for
Bitcoin and so much more just a reminder
nothing said in this podcast is a
solicitation to buy or sell any tokens
and that nothing should be taken as
Financial advice the host or guests May
hold tokens discussed and any given
episode and you can check out a
disclaimer on the Neo news today website
and if you enjoyed this episode please
like subscribe and comment on your
favorite podcasting platforms every like
comment and share really helps us get
the podcast in front of more ears and
eyes
so I really enjoyed chatting with Max
and I hope you enjoy the conversation
too hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today I'm really psyched
we're joined by Max hillbrand the CEO of
ZK snacks a development team that's
dedicated to building and implementing
privacy Solutions into the broader
Bitcoin ecosystem uh Max I'm really
excited to have you on how you doing
today oh very well Dylan thanks for the
invite I'm really looking forward to the
conversation yeah I think um we've done
almost 70 episodes of the podcast and I
think you might be kind of like one of
the first like true Bitcoin only focused
kind of oish type folks so I'm really
excited to just kind of like delve into
your philosophy uh like Cipher Punk
movements the importance of Bitcoin like
Austrian economics and all of this um so
kind of to get the conversation started
I'm just really curious to hear from
your perspective and maybe from some
folks who are listening who might not
have had this flavor of like why you're
dedicated to building in the blockchain
and crypto space given the concerns of
central banks just overprinting copious
amounts of Fiat currencies why is it
that Bitcoin is a superior in sound
money for the 21st century and beyond I
think we have tremendous problems right
right now as as as a humanity and on on
numerous fronts you know we we don't
have to go through through the list but
it's obviously quite big and I think
there's a a a common Road cause factor
to a a large amount of problems that
that we're currently facing um you know
and fundamentally I I would argue it's
all about theft right as soon as humans
start stealing from each other just goes
down the hill um and there's numerous
ways that that we could steal from each
other and and one that that is most
obfuscated and hidden uh but Mo and most
vicious uh is is via money printing
right so uh when we increase the money
supply then we start a a chain of value
transfer right where we move money away
uh from the people who receive those
this newly created money later and and
to those people who received the newly
created money first and obviously if you
print money you get rich right but you
don't get rich because you you work
productively and solve problems of
others you you get rich because you took
it from from others um and that's that's
just not cool and it's obviously not
cool um but but the consequences of of
this down the line are are way worse
than than you would imagine you know
it's not just that the the value of the
money goes down or in other words the
the prices of everything else goes up
but it's much more than that is is we
start messing with with the price
structure of the world itself and um
prices are extremely important in in
today's uh or in any economy uh and and
prices are emergent right we we only
know what the price is because two
people in the past agreed uh on on you
know the trade of something I'll will
give you the steak for three eggs or
whatever it is and and this trade
established a price a relation of the
value of different goods and services
and this is incredibly incredibly
important because this is literally the
only way that we can find out what's the
worth of something right what uh how
much more valuable is this one thing
compared to the other thing that's
extremely difficult to do because value
is subjective you know and I don't know
how much more you prefer your steak over
banana um but on the other hand if if we
do have a price relation right after
free trade then we actually can compare
the the the PR and and the value and
worth of things which now means we can
start making smart decisions of how to
allocate our resources which of our
resources should solve which specific
problem and should I build this house
out of wood of concrete out of stones
out of glass these are all possible
options of of how I could build a house
um and and ultimately we we have to
choose one um and if that choice is is
going to be accurate and and useful and
wise in the long run uh depends in large
Parts uh on the monetary system and and
how uh it is being controlled and and so
we can have monetary systems where a
priest class of of people can simply
issue on commands and new units of the
money and and use it in their trade
starting this train reaction of of the
distorting the economy uh or we can have
a monetary system that uh does not have
certain privileged positions uh where
simply everyone has a equal position and
this is the set rules of the monetary
system and nobody can change it it's
like gold you know the number of atoms
and number of protons in in the atom
that Define gold is is very clear and
nobody's going to change that and and
that means it's it's a neutral money
system where we simply cannot increase
or change the money supply uh and and so
Bitcoin is for the first time a digital
money you know a money in cyers space uh
where we finally have a thing that we
can pass around and trade with people so
that we emerge a price uh in cyberspace
for goods and services and and finally
this this price can can be transferred
instantly um over over the internet and
this enables an entirely new class of of
ways that we can allocate our resources
and and solve incredibly complex
problems so I think like over the
history the average the history of
humanity the average lifespan for a fiat
currency is like something like 27 years
and if you go back to the Advent of just
monies in general uh thinking about the
Roman Empire gold was kind of the go-to
gold and silver because it was this hard
money that had a finite Supply and you
know as you mentioned earlier had these
very specific characteristics and then
over time the money would kind of start
to become degraded and debased as people
learned they could melt down the gold
and put copper into it and really just
decrease the kind of value that the gold
had by bastardizing it basically with
copper and other metals and then you
know Society kind of that Society
collapses after the money's debased and
then we come back to Gold again and this
is the cycle for Empires as they kind of
grow and bust they go through this hard
money solution then they go into a Fiat
solution the fiat currency debases and
falls apart and then they go back to a
gold standard and this is kind of played
out over so many civilizations over
Millennia to the point where if you look
on like a 3 to 500 year time frame frame
it's almost cyclical so as we move
forward in the 21st century and we have
the Bitcoin and the Bitcoin Network what
is it that gives you kind of uh
conviction that Bitcoin is the crypto
Digital hard money that will be able to
survive uh the fall and rise of Empires
moving forward that's a really bold
claim and and and it does sound
ludicrous right because Bitcoin is
man-made after all right and how could
men come up with something that's
Incorruptible by men who has created it
so to say so it's it's a very tough cell
to really believe that Bitcoin will
stick around uh for for eternity um and
U you know on the other hand though uh
why not it could continue functioning
the way that it currently functions you
know blocks have been produced in the
last 15 years nonstop uh right on
schedule uh there hasn't been an invalid
block um the money supply hasn't been
increased uh individual coins hav been
stolen right every transaction had a
valid signature uh so seemingly this
protocol Works flawlessly at the moment
um now there are however obvious
limitations to the protocol itself right
throughput is is one obvious issue we
basically have have a database that we
allow anyone to write data to right like
that and right the database is only
useful if everyone else verifies and
reads through the entire database and
that's that's absolutely ridiculous um
and so first of all we need to somehow
rate limit how we we keep adding new
blocks right because if anyone can can
write however much they want well our
database is going to be PAB bites
instantly um so this is where the genius
of of proof of work comes in right you
can only write a valid block um if the
hash of it is below a certain numerical
value um and and this is a way that we
have without identity without Authority
a way to um to rate limit access rights
to this database which is quite an
absolute genius invention um but
nevertheless there's there's then just
proof of work is not enough right
because someone needs to verify the
proof of work and and that's another key
part of Bitcoin then that the The
Sovereign use of of Bitcoin is via a
full node so that your own software
verifies from the very beginning U to
the current moment every single
transaction or every single block that
has ever happened um and and this is of
course a very computationally expensive
process and also bandwith expensive
process um and this uh you know so this
clearly doesn't sound like it's going to
scale and and it clearly has a privacy
problem if if everyone needs to verify
everyone else's transactions and and
these were the two first criticisms to
bitcoin instantly right as as the white
paper was published uh and it's still a
very very valid criticism um it's quite
unsure if Bitcoin can in fact scale uh
to a substantial amount of people um and
nevertheless the the beautiful thing is
that it is an engineering system and and
we can engineer with it and on top of it
uh so we've seen numerous Improv mov
ments to the Bitcoin protocol itself
right even a change to its signature
algorithm right which is I me a
substantial change um and and there
might you know even more further
substantial changes coming in the future
to address technological issues and then
increase the throughput and or we can
build uh second and third layers on on
top of of AAS layer to exponentially
potentially increase uh transaction
through um but you know this this
answers the technological you know
Improvement trajectory of Bitcoin but
then wait a second if if we can so
easily change the protocol uh and make
it better then couldn't we just make it
better by doubling the money supply as
well right because apparently it's
possible to to change the rules um and
uh so that's here again where I guess
this is almost like a social experiment
uh because if people would truly like to
increase the money supply it's like one
line of cat you know it's it's very very
trivial to change it um now sure the
deployment of it might be a bit tricky
and there's a lot of nuances in in these
peer-to-peer systems but but ultimately
it's just code and and it's free in open
source and you can change it to whatever
you want so U because Bitcoin is a a
consensual system where where people
need to literally agree to the software
that they run on their computer um then
this this means that they can you change
it um just nobody can force them to to
change it uh so to say and you you uh
choose which code to run on your machine
and depending Which choice you make you
will create a different monetary system
uh in in your cyber space and so the the
the set of Bitcoin rules are you know
rather small and and and and obvious and
and can be implemented and run on your
machine but you might also for example
choose the set of rules for ethereum or
or any of the other um chains right so
that that means that we have a pure
Anarchy in money right not just can you
have the ultimate choice of which money
do you want to use even more you can
create your own money right easily with
with just a couple lines of code um and
and that is a a completely new
competitive market for for the creation
of of monetary Goods in cyberspace and
that that Bitcoin has started and uh
that that's what makes me optimistic in
the long run not not that Bitcoin itself
might um might be the ultimate solution
but that through this competition that
that Bitcoin has started um numerous
entrepreneurs will sooner or later come
come up with a solution that that is
ever more perfect you hit on so many
interesting topics there privacy and
scaling for Bitcoin um the fact that
this digital money for cyberspace is
simp simply just code and social
consensus and that it's really opened
the door for conversation about what a
hard digital money might be um and that
this today Bitcoin might be the best
solution but this might not be the best
solution as time moves on and I really
can't wait to dig into all of these
different facets but I do want to just
kind of like take a step back and walk
our listeners through how you got to
this point how you became the CEO of ZK
snacks and how you came to this philos
opy and this ideology so maybe um we
could just kind of like start in your
earlier formative years before you
started delving into Bitcoin how did
your educational path lead you um to
studying economies and Austrian
economics my my mother thankfully uh
urged me early on in life to to be
productive and you know to get small
little jobs handing out newspapers
washing dishes in the restaurants these
these types of things um and um I'm I'm
forever grateful for her because that
really taught me the the the value and
the pleasure of of being productive and
and helping others and um it it also
kickstarted my curiosity on know why do
we work like why do we build stuff and
and and how and how can we make it
better Etc uh these questions just
always um I thought very curious uh and
then I I thought that I might find some
solution in in books and Theory uh and
you know looked at the first economics
books that that I could find and they
were all Keynesian macroeconomic and I I
was very confused because either I'm I'm
too stupid and I just don't get it or it
was very very very wrong um and then I I
kept looking for Alternatives and sooner
or later stumbled upon uh Austrian
economics and um Ludwick Fus Hans hopp
and especially Murray rosart who just
have such a a a incredibly clear and and
well formulated and and obviously
correct way of of looking at the the
consequences of of human behavior uh and
and what we can deduce on on you know
what the economy is and and and why it
functions the way it does and you know
what our interest rate what is money
right all of these extremely interesting
questions are just so like clearcut
obviously explained with AUST economics
it's it's it's almost laughable of of
how obvious and and easy it is once you
actually start to think in this way it's
it's a very it's it's a paradigm shift
you know the the previous schools of
economic thought are trying so hard so
hard to impress you with fancy words and
math and graph and it just doesn't work
but then you you just you know take one
one little axium you know humans act
like very innocent sounding starting
statement and all of a sudden with that
mind shift and that way of of analyzing
the world of Economics from the
individual all of a sudden everything
makes sense um and and this Paradigm
Shift really uh impressed me so much uh
that that I thought well I'll I'll keep
looking into this things and and then
only later that I discover technology uh
and and software and and the cyer for
punos um so that was definitely my my
second love but my first is clearly
praxiology um so do you remember kind of
the first time you came across Bitcoin
and since you kind of took it upon
yourself to delve into these um studies
of economics and you yourself like kind
of debunked mmt and you kind of
developed your own philosophy as to why
Austrian economics was the most sound
when you came across Bitcoin were you
like me and so many others I've had on
this podcast where you looked at it and
you just kind of looked past it and then
came back another time and and had like
a second aha or a Genesis moment or did
Bitcoin kind of Click for you and and
kind of when did you first stumble on
bitcoin yeah um absolutely it was it was
the very commonly heard Trope um of the
first time I heard it I was like this
doesn't sound that interesting like um
and you know just probably probably some
fake money online it's not really it's
not even real right it's not physical um
uh and you know I I already back then
was involved with with AUST economics
and I understood that um information is
not scarce right and and so we cannot
have a digital money because money must
be scarce right if it's a double
spending issue right if like I give you
the the money and I can give it to
someone else then that's that's not
money right that's like a thought but
not money and and so I dismissed Bitcoin
early on and what what really changed in
between the the second time of of
encountering it was um a friend helping
me to install yuntu you know the my
first Linux operating system uh and and
really explaining me what what free and
open source software really means um and
and by that time I I read um against
intellectual property by Stefan kinsella
a beautiful uh economics book about um
the absolute nonsense that that is
intellectual property or or the claim of
ownership of ideas it's it's ludicrous
and and very very harmful and dangerous
mentality um and and so I I then it made
made click that free software is a
foundationally correct and and ethically
morally righteous um well method of of
shipping and delivering code and and the
Clos Source proprietary software is it's
like theft it's it's not good uh it's
modern forms of slavery um so I'm
realizing that um free software is is
Paramount um and and then encountering
Bitcoin again and realizing that this is
a a free software monetary system um
then it started to click for me uh and
and and blow my mind uh and it's where
then I I delved much deeper into the
philosophy of of Technology um and and
Cipher punks as specifically yeah I
think for me and many others who were a
part of my or our generation my first
kind of aha moment with free and open
source software was Napster and while
I'm not advocating for um taking money
out of the pockets of artists who who
create content that we love to consume
that takes time and energy and and they
should be rewarded for that there was a
moment of Freedom when I was able to
like download my first Eminem album that
my parents didn't want me to listen to
because of curse words but the power
that I felt and the empowerment that I
felt after I was able to do so which was
enabled by Torrance and open source
software was really a moment that
forever kind of changed my trajectory
and how I view the way that people
should be able to access information and
just all sorts of data on the internet
so if we fast forward to kind of today's
day and age I think we're starting to
see a sort of attack on this um we can
say that Metallica attacked this open
access to music files uh when they sued
Napster and in the crypto space we can
say that we really started to see this
attack on privacy preserving technology
in mid to late 2022 when the US
Department of Justice went after tornado
cash which is a mixing service on
ethereum that allows the obfuscation of
people's ethereum
um to kind of hide the trail of the
wallets that connected that asset so now
that tornado cash is on the sanctions
list and we've seen some other kind of
like negative actions taken towards the
Bitcoin ecosystem uh particularly with
the founders of Samurai wallet being
arrested and some of the issues will go
into with Wasabi wallet and coin join
being shut down uh at a high level from
your perspective where are we right now
in the uh first they laugh at you or
first they ignore you then they laugh at
you then they fight you then then you
win phase um when we're looking at
governments and the threat that they
have on privacy preserving technology
where are we right now in the grand
scheme of the fight towards being able
to transact freely online and privately
um how much of a threat are governments
right now towards us and Bitcoin and
Bitcoin users well I mean governments
have since for a long time been been the
greatest threat to to humanity um by a
long shot right I mean look at the
number of hundreds of millions of people
killed by government in the last century
um and uh that's well an unfortunate
reality that that we have to deal with
we live in a dangerous world uh there
are well Psychopaths and and crazy
criminals out there uh and well we we
have to adapt uh this is what censorship
means right uh any authoritarian regime
starts by by censoring first speech and
and and trade uh and uh ultimately uh
payments itself uh so this is is nothing
new though right this is not a a new
conflict recently started this is an
ancient Millennial old Battle of of good
versus evil um and uh that well that
means that it's it's very expected right
obviously when when you take away the
power of the king uh the king is not
happy he he would like to keep his
slaves uh and that uh is well that's
that's the reality but that's where cyer
punks come in like they're punks like
actually punks uh because they say no to
Authority and and no uh to tyranny uh
this is U something that well uh is is
part of the ethos of of the internet
right it was a network to Route Around
censorship to Route around people who
who try to uh stop you from spreading
your information from burning the books
that you would like to publish um and uh
this you know uh got escalated in the
1990s with with the crypto Wars uh where
where cryptography like math formulas
where classic his ammunitions right if
if you sent this book across Seas then
straight to gulak um like those were the
realities right what Phil simmerman did
was officially illegal right the
authority said You shall not use strong
encryption P stop and these are are the
types of courageous actions that that U
need to be taken in in the face of of
tyranny and and thank God that the early
Cipher P punks did so uh because uh well
the internet would not exist without
this use of strong cryptography
uh that that we enjoy so much right now
um and and of course neither with with
cryptocurrencies right and and Bitcoin
um so this is where Cypher Punk's right
code comes in um we we still have a
inkling of Freedom left so that we can
choose uh which code to write and and
where to publish it and and so free and
unashamed people will continue to write
the codes that the tyrants would prefer
them not to publish so you bring up an
interesting point with the cipher punks
and um there's a long and storied
history history with mathematics and
cryptography that goes well beyond the
Advent of the internet I mean if you
look at kind of like this really cool
tree of how the Bitcoin paper came to be
and that it's really an aggregation of
40 or plus different academic
Publications that date back to the 60s
maybe even before um you can really see
that there's a rich history and the
cipher Punk movement but today in 2024
you know we have stars launching meme
coins we have l2s launching on top of
l1's and L3 is launching on top of l2s
it can be very difficult for somebody
who's new to this space to really find
signal through the noise because so much
out there is really just trying to scam
people out of their time attention and
money and so you can get lost in this
kind of flash of quote unquote getting
rich overnight and and really like the
ethos of blockchain and cryptocurrency
came from the cipher Punk movement so
I'm curious to hear your perspective in
2024 um so many people that I've had on
the Pod don't necessarily talk about a
cipher Punk ethos so is that kind of
ideology and movement of Cipher punks
still alive today yeah absolutely it's
life and kicking it's been better than
than ever before right like 30 years ago
they were like what three for cyppher
punks wasn't really much um and and they
were like just you know occasionally
writing mails to each other not not
really actively doing much um you know
there are a couple Heroes Nick saabo hin
that that really did did exceptional
work and and and and substantial
progress for for Humanity and thank God
for them um but nowadays I would say uh
there's probably the the all-time high
of of Cipher Punk um yeah adherence uh
so far uh and you know that like the
fact that that we see everyone and and
their mama now creating their own
cryptocurrency is I I guess the the
perfect like Trope that that Cypher
punks have won um that uh that again now
it is possible to create tokens online
and and and send them to people right
this this was something that 30 30 years
ago was like this wet dream like might
this ever be possible like are we going
to figure this out yeah we figured it
out and and and now we can use it and
and we can build these systems of trade
in cyberspace now uh which which simply
wasn't possible before and and like the
internet was cool right but the internet
had this massive handicap of just being
about information and not being about
trade like we tried to use the internet
for trades and since forever because
humans trade all the time right that's
what we do um but just trading with only
words is really really tough because you
know you want to get that stake um and
and now with Bitcoin we we finally have
a a a way to establish scarcity in cyers
space so that we can hand around digital
tokens um in in a trustless fashion and
and that's absolutely wonderful right so
uh the I think the cyppher punks would
would be absolutely proud with with what
we have uh created now because we we
don't just have Anonymous communication
networks right and and Anonymous ways of
of publishing uh distributedly and and
censorship resistant um but but also way
of of you know having money and and
making uh transactions and and payments
and and multilock Es grows and and smart
contracts like all of this amazing
amazing Visionary Tech from 30 years ago
is is now actually here and and usable
more or less usable but but uh steadily
and continuously improving um so yeah
cyer punks are winning hard I remember
when um I first I've been using the
internet since basically as long as I
could read a chapter book um so I feel
super blessed to have been able to have
kind of like been part of the first wave
of retail internet users and back in the
day like using a credit card online was
super sketchy and people were terrified
that it wouldn't be securely transmitted
uh over the wires and today we have
these cryptoeconomic models with with
with economic models baked into the code
which is really what kind of the
revolution is in terms of like the tech
stack that cryptocurrencies offer so
when I go to like Bitcoin meetups here
in Denver and I tell people that uh my
day job job is creating content for an
ALT L1 Network they look me in my face
and call me a coiner and tell me I'm
scamming people so I'm just like I want
to double down on what you were saying
that uh maybe you know the early Cipher
punks were wanted to create uh
peer-to-peer cash that couldn't be
bastardized or stopped by a nation state
uh but today's hardcore bitcoiners might
not even like the fact that there are
such things as icos initial token
offerings coins nfts other sorts of
distributed technology enabled Solutions
and they might just say that the only
one use case for cryptocurrencies is
what Bitcoin is it's an ultrasound
immutable peer-to-peer money so do you
think that um this is kind of like a
part of the beautiful solution that that
Bitcoin has created the fact that we can
make these meme coins and I can create
my own nft and maybe they are going to
be digital identity Solutions on these
distributed peer-to-peer networks is
that like kind of a beautiful byproduct
of what the cipher punks wanted I I
guess I'm just like kind of asking you
to um to double down on what you were
just saying and and maybe if there's
anything else that kind of like popped
up in your mind yeah I mean when we have
an easy way to create new tokens online
then as as with any technology we can
use that for for good or for evil right
we can use this as you know for example
an ethical way to represent shares of of
a company no is absolutely possible
right or on the other hand we could also
create a Ponzi scheme right and pump and
dump it on telegram groups and and get
really rich and I guess the uh
especially during like 2017 like around
that time it it was just absolutely in
insanely wild of of the the the quantity
and quality of of the scams and and I
mean like you know literal scams like
actual Ponzi schemes running away with
your money type of scam um and you know
that's that's a big problem you know
it's it's kind of the Wild West if if
it's very easily possible for anyone not
just to create the token but then also
to broadly communicate and and Market uh
about this then it's just uh like
radically different from anything we've
seen in the past and a lot of people who
might not be as techsavvy or or let's
say economically Savvy uh can easily get
fooled with this um you know that sucks
but such is life you know um and on on
and I guess that's why a lot of uh
Bitcoin Maxes would would recommend the
focus on on bitcoin right because
especially during that time the
likelihood that you know something where
you even made decent amount of due
diligence ended up being a scam was was
very very very high uh and and so the
the very naive and and stupid Simple
Choice of just to bitcoin um probably
saved 99% of of the people who would
have dabbled in in shitcoin otherwise uh
so I I very much understand this and um
you know further like companies and
stocks and debt products are are really
cool they're they're really interesting
right we can do project Finance uh Etc
this is very great technology but money
is just so so much more foundationally
important than any individual business
uh plus the today is like Fiat monetary
system is is so much broken right like
the Fiat Corporation system also you
know pretty bad and the debt markets
it's a mess but like the Fiat money
system is I don't know 10x larger of a
problem um and and that's why at least
for me the focus on bitcoin is um is is
a irrational one in the sense of let's
let's fix the biggest problems first and
then once we have a sound monetary
standard we can actually you know build
companies and and depth Vehicles Etc on
on a much more sound footing um this
doesn't mean that like nobody should
work on companies or or debt structures
like until I have fixed the money right
here that's ridiculous right so um I I
think yeah there's just a lot of well
craziness in the last couple years in
the crypto space and a lot of toxicity
that might come from the right place of
of let's try not to scam people and and
and protect them from scammers uh but
but fundamentally I'm I'm I'm an
anarchist in the sense of free
competition is the the solution to to
numerous problems right consensual uh
trade and uh you have no right to deny
someone the privilege of creating his
own coin like that's simply not how
reality is and and how ethics is uh so
um yeah I I personally focus on on the
money problem and uh to me Bitcoin has
for for many reasons the the most likely
solution to the money problem and there
and there's only a very few other
currencies or or tokens let's let's call
them more broadly that that would
address the money problem to bitcoin
like Monero you know potentially like
even C is like Ah that's like probably
not right but um so there's like only
probably one and a half decent options
of of using as a base money for
cyberspace uh and and Bitcoin is is the
vast majority of that so that's you know
why a focus on bitcoin is is prudent but
it's um it's not a blanket statement
that anything that is not Bitcoin must
be a scam and and and a stealing from
people um so it's just you know do do
your own research yeah I appreciate that
perspective a lot and I mean even like
if you look at ethereum when paired
against Bitcoin it's only gone down on
the E BC BTC chart so maybe these toxic
Maxis uh might have been right because
almost everything has gone down when
when compared on the BTC chart but I
think that you know for somebody who's
really into Bitcoin to steal the
autonomy of somebody to educate
themselves and to make their own
decision and just say you should only
buy this asset is really stealing our
opportunity to participate in one of the
greatest things that exists today which
is an open and free market so I always
find that to be sort of um hypocrisy in
a way but I understand that you know
maybe somebody who wholeheartedly
believes in the the nature of Bitcoin
might really want to espouse that from a
maximalist perspective but now I kind of
want to like zero in on the technology
because we don't always have to talk
about assets and prices and if this is
going to make me money or not or or what
a money is and I think something that
kind of brings interest to me today is
when we're talking about privacy the
best way to buy anything in the most
private Fashion Is by using a physical
piece of paper of fiat currency if I
don't want the government knowing what
I'm buying I should pay with dollar
bills
and so today if we were going to create
the US dollar I don't even think it
would be legal by current politician
standards to create that so clearly even
at the fundamental level of what our
currency is today current politicians
might not even like it so when we talk
about privacy um we spoke about this
earlier I really do feel like that it
we're we're in an age right now where
the powers that be are fundamentally
trying to attack anything that creates
and builds and preserves privacy so
maybe now we can talk a little bit about
the work that you do at ZK snacks and
the ZK part of snacks stands for zero
knowledge which helps Implement privacy
Solutions so maybe we could start at a
high level where has uh Bitcoin gotten
it wrong with privacy and what are some
of the solutions that you and your team
at DK snacks are trying to build to add
this layer of privacy onto this layer of
of secure cyberspace money yeah I guess
the the Glorious realization of of CK
snack specifically or become more
generally is that um the Privacy problem
in Bitcoin isn't is or in other words
Bitcoin does not have a fundamental
privacy flaw Bitcoin can have
exceptionally great privacy or not much
at all right and and the existing
protocol almost the protocol that
Satoshi released in 2009 could
accommodate both use cases um and and
Satoshi eluded this in in the white
paper right that this is obviously a a
not perfectly private system but we can
improve things by for example creating a
new public key for each time we get paid
I do not reuse your addresses it's a
very simple you know implementation
detail of just rate Keys you know that's
what chat messages do or like all the
time so it's it's not that difficult but
provides a substantial privacy um and
and then also in the white paper sty
also mentions that there's this one
assumption that like um you know when we
have multiple inputs the coins being
spent in in a transaction then they're
very likely to belong to the same person
and so like one person can create
multiple can add multiple of his coins
to be spent at the same time in a
transaction um this is the common input
ownership aristic and that's quite a
nasty one because let's assume you got
paid three times in the past and you
always generated a new address so at the
time when you get paid these are three
perfectly random looking addresses
nobody knows that they belong to the
same person and so at this point where
you just got paid nobody knows that you
got paid three times um but then when
you spend your your money and you create
a transaction that has let's say three
inputs and and two outputs and you spend
all of the three coins that you have in
the past you put one output to the
merchant for the lambo and one output
for your change back and now you have
revealed quite a substantial amount like
to everyone you've revealed that look
there's these three coins from different
addresses uh but they got spent at the
same time in the same transaction seems
like they all belong to the same person
and uh and then further you might have
revealed by you know for example using a
rounded amount or something like this
that this is the payment output and so
someone bought and then here's the
change so now we've not just linked the
three transactions of your past but also
the future transaction of of where you
going to spend your change money in the
future um and of course the the merchant
gets a lot of information about you as
well right he knows you have these three
coins uh you held on to them for like 10
years you know they were like really old
coins and and you're spending them now
like uh maybe I can you know and look
you have like 100 Bitcoin left over in
the change well that's that's juicy
maybe you know I'll I'll not let you
leave the building why not I mean so
this is obviously a big problem but then
there's a very obvious solution to this
um and it's basically that different
people can own the different coins in
the same transaction right there's no
rule in Bitcoin that says the very same
person must make a transaction all by
himself no right the rules are there
must be more inputs than than outputs
right and and every input must have a
signature and stuff like this but
there's no rule saying that uh you
cannot know combine or you cannot
collaborate with others to create a
transaction together um and so that's
basically what a coin join is right it's
it's a Bitcoin blockchain transaction
with inputs and outputs and signatures
where we have hundreds of inputs and
hundreds of outputs and not all of them
belong to the same person and and now
something really really interesting has
happened right because we moved from
this way of of like three inputs two
outputs it's very easy to say like all
of the inputs belong to the same person
and they went to this change output
right so that's the same person that
that still has we can see a flow from
inputs to outputs right we can
intuitively see it right um but as soon
as we increase the count of inputs and
outputs it becomes obvious that inside
of the Bitcoin protocol inside a single
transaction we have a perfectly
Anonymous transfer of satoshis right
it's because it's not like the first
Satoshi of the first input goes into the
first satosi of the first output and
that's that's not how it works that's
how ordinals uh for example works but
not the Bitcoin protocol itself right in
in the Bitcoin protocol the Satoshi
don't move from inputs to outputs so to
say but the satoshis are destroyed on
the input side and new satosi are
created on the output side it's like a
wormhole right it's it's not that you
flow from left to right it's you
disappear and you reappear on the other
side of the room um and this is a
perfect theoretically perfect um
anonymity set right there there is no
way that you could link the one input
two output because there is no flow
right it's an atom IC destruction and
creation of of a numerical value right
it's the satosi amount is just a number
it's just like an integer right it
doesn't need have a denomination or
anything it's just 27003 like that's
just a number there is no internal
reference from one number to another um
and that's the realization right that
wow Bitcoin is a perfect Anonymous
system as long as we analyze a single
transaction and this transaction has
sufficient number of inputs and outputs
and but the cool thing is nobody tells
us how like we can design our own
transactions right as long as they're
valid to bitcoin consensus and that's
basically what Wasabi wallet did uh it's
it's a like a higher like a coordination
protocol that users of a Bitcoin wallet
right so end user wallet software uh can
talk to each other via a central
coordinator to communicate the creation
of a new Bitcoin transaction with many
inputs and many outputs uh in such a way
that you know um like it's it is secure
and and nobody can steal or or spy uh on
each other and um therefore we have a
way that without trusted third parties
without handing over control over your
money simply by sending your money to
yourself right and coordinating the
creation of of this new transaction uh
you you can you know securely transfer
Bitcoin in a in a much more private way
so you you you said that it was like the
central coordinator that kind of
obis um the creation and the
distribution of the the utxo but this
was done in a decentralized manner so
what's kind of the uh like the dichotomy
between having the coordinator but also
the service being completely
decentralized yeah so there there have
been throughout a long time ways that to
to make Bitcoin more private on the end
user level and and the most common way
that was it's like known as a custodial
mixer right so you have a service
provider he has his own private keys and
know Ellis sends her money to to Bob and
Charlie sends his money to Bob and
everyone sends his money to Bob and
later feels like it he can give the
money back to them but he uses different
coins and so an outside Observer doesn't
really know what's what's going on here
because there's like a bank a money
Warehouse um that uh that is in the
middle here um this is very effective
but of course it comes with the risk
that this guy can run away with your
money um and whenever there is such a
risk asymmetry there's a lot of Legacy
Fiat regulation that you know Banks as
such should should be regulated and you
know potentially that's that's a valid
thing but in any case there's like
people with guns coming after you if you
do this um the coin join coordination
however is is fundamentally different
right because uh nobody is sending money
to a service provider right you with a
coin join you're 100% all the time in
full control of your money right the the
money never leaves your private Keys um
what what what you do with this
coordination is you simply talk to a
group of people to create a new unsigned
Bitcoin transaction you know something
that will be broadcasted to the Bitcoin
blockchain at a later point in time with
many inputs and and many outputs and
many signatures so this is a uh almost a
coordination Service is like a group
messaging server right this is a a
server where we have hundreds of users
wanting to sign the same message it's
almost like a petition you know we want
we we want to declare this and we're all
going to put our signature underneath um
and the coordinator simply just helps
you know to to coordinate and
communicate with all of these members on
Okay who wants to be on on this contract
that we're signing um so the
coordination server is is a very
untrusted piece of technology uh he
cannot run away with your money right he
cannot steal from you and he cannot spy
on you um so this is simply a a a dumb
messaging really right he takes
encrypted payload and and passes it on
to to someone else um and and so
therefore you know it's not a bank it's
not a money transmitting business it's
it's simply a messaging reel um and so
these are of course very easy and
trivial to run um and yeah work
flawlessly is that basically then the
main differentiation between what Wasabi
was and what Samurai wallet was was that
Wasabi provided this coordination
service whereas Samurai wallet provided
that custodial mixing solution um no uh
in fact samurai or specifically world
coolist is also a coin join coordination
model which makes this very very
interesting case right because in the
past there were numerous shopd downs and
and arrests of providers of of these um
Anonymous money warehouses right these
these unregistered Banks basically um
you know arguably for for you know
obvious reasons um but but this is the
first time where a a pure messaging
relay is is being attacked right we're
we're basically saying no like you're
not allowed to pass these messages on to
other people right and and which you
know that's kind of shocking because
that's what isps do you know uh so um
yeah it's it's a very interesting case
um of you know a yet another uh
overreach of uh the government
enforcement and so um I think with uh
much sadness and dismay um CK snacks
shut down its coin join um Services as
of July 1st 2024 so yesterday as a
recording so rip um why did the team
decide to disband these services and
maybe you could just share a little bit
about um what the concerns are for an
entity that's providing these privacy
enabling tools for uh immutable
peer-to-peer digital Money Networks yeah
indeed it is uh un forunate um and you
know considering the the current risk
environment it it seems a a reasonable
Choice uh it has always been very risky
to to work in cutting age uh Industries
you can get hacked or have malicious
employees um and of course government
crackdowns uh as as a phenomenal risk uh
and this is something that of course has
been obvious and and well calculated um
however there at least was was some
expectation of of decency and at least
sticking to to previously published
rules right because there were of course
numerous guidelines and and such that
that self custodial Technologies right
where the service provider does not have
the ability to run away with the user
money obviously not a bank right so um
that was the Assumption under which all
the entire ecosystem I guess um operated
um and now there have been well
throughout the recent years numerous uh
um I guess shots at at these foundations
um and specifically with Samurai
seemingly an obvious uh just uh
dismissal uh of of Juris prudence and uh
and past guidelines saying that that no
custody custody is not a a a identifier
or a marks for a money transmitter
business right you you don't actually
need to hold the money in order to
transmit it apparently um and you know
this puts a um legal uncertainty on an
interest stre that previously uh was was
pretty clearcut um and CK snack was you
know from the very beginning not
designed as a criminal organization we
like software developers and academic
researchers and such um and then
obviously uh when uh the environment
changes and and a peaceful software as a
service business all of a sudden is at
least claimed uh to be illegal which of
course still has to be held up in front
of Court um but this just increases the
the risk of of running such a business
um you know guys with with black bags
might come and and kidnap you at any
time and not just you but but your
employees right uh and this is is also
not just of course the direct kidnapping
and and arrest issue but a lot of
indirect pressures as well um all of all
of the founders basically have had their
bank accounts shut off right the wives
of the founders had their bank accounts
shut off um and like numerous
harassments and operation choke point
2.0 style indirect pressure points um
where you know at some point the the
risks is is simply too large uh for a
publicly known entity in in attempting
to do this the legal route uh to to do
it um if just is a a sad state that
communication relays are under tyranny
at at such an advanced stage and have to
fear for their lives um so yeah it's
unfortunately not as free of a world as
as many of us would like there to be uh
but thankfully we have the Technologies
to well work against these evil forces
Yeah you mentioned that um the samurai
Founders bank accounts were shut off so
were their wives and it's not just in
the US that this happened um a few years
ago the the protesters the trucking
protesters in Canada they themselves had
their bank account shut down so it's a
multi-jurisdictional kind of choke point
that doesn't just exist in the US but
this has been proven to happen in other
countries as well so it's sad to see
that um Wasabi had to shut down um you
mentioned earlier that ZK snack is kind
of shuttering its doors so as we kind of
transition back out um I guess I have a
two- part question which might be
semi-related or not at all um a do you
think that non-custodial wallet
providers are at risk generally not just
um non-custodial wallet providers that
provided coin join services are we at a
point in the battle against the
regulators and the people who want to
control Power where they're going to
shut down our ability to even hold a
ledger and secondly what's next for the
ZK snacks team well firstly absolutely
and and yes uh very unfortunately uh but
uh the well the the war against human
Freedom has has continuously wrapped up
in in the last couple years and uh
unfortunately I don't see it stopping
anytime soon uh so I would urge anyone
active in this space to be uh very
careful we're we're dealing with with
dangerous people here uh and and we need
to oh take smart and carefully
calculated decisions um so yeah please
uh protect yourself and and become
conscious of the IM immense Terror that
we are fighting here uh and and the
extent of brutality that is willing to
to be went to um just again read a
little bit up on the history of the last
century and and what uh governments have
have done to humanity and um morality
has has not improved so the the next
round of of genocide will will be way
worse uh and I fear that people on the
Forefront of of ideology and technology
and and philosophy right like Freedom
Fighters as as bitcoiners are um are to
be the first in the Gul
um this has happened in the past again
you know the the dissidence and and
opposition of political parties are are
frequently exterminated uh so this is
nothing new um I guess we might have
underestimated uh of how much of a
serious situation this is um but
ultimately uh yeah this this is what the
fight is all about uh so welcome to the
fight for censorship resistance and then
what so what's yeah yeah what's next for
ZK snack I mean you guys are disbanding
unfortunately um I don't get the sense
that this is the end of your fight uh in
this in this space and in providing
Technologies to help empower the
individual I get the sense that the
co-founders of ZK snacks don't feel this
way either so where are you and your
team going to focus your efforts next
yeah c s was a um well babun group of of
of people so to say and we um as a
company is is unfortunately definitely
shutting down um and and um wasami
wallet was the the main effort that that
was developed and and the main Service
uh provided and so it simply doesn't
make sense to uh continue this company
if the service is no longer provided and
so um this definitely means means some
changes CK SX was well a a quite
benevolent supporter of free open source
software hiring numerous developers and
and researchers and Educators um and and
so This falls apart U which is of course
a big shame you know um having to let go
of dedicated people who who you know
work on advancing human flourishing is
always a sad thing uh on the other hand
uh this was one some of the most
talented people I've I've ever got the
pleasure to meeting so i' I have no
doubt that they won't be bored in in the
future years and and will continue to be
productive um so uh yeah we will see
where where individuals uh end up you
know continuing to contribute um but you
know I I doubt that any of them are are
going to go back to the Fiat minds and
and the Fiat mindset I think once once
you you know
take take these builds um there is no
turning back yeah and and I bet it's an
unfair question to ask the CEO of a
company that he's currently shutting
down what's next but do you have
anything on your radar next or are you
just kind of still in the day-to-day
taking care of of finalizing the shut
the shutting down of ZK snacks well the
the ultimate long game is is still the
same right ending human slavery and and
establishing a free and prosperous
Society um nothing has changed there for
for many years um uh nuances of of
strategy are for sure different um and
again um doing it with in a risk
cautious way uh if you know state power
continues to crack down then we need to
become smart and and careful in in how
we continue to operate um so if I I will
see on on what the de tells or what will
come in the future um but I I haven't
been bored in the space for many years
there there are so many fascinating and
worthwhile and and important projects uh
that are eagerly waiting for
contributions of of of everyone uh so um
yeah I I won't be bored and and I'm
pretty sure that that the audience won't
either if they want to apply themselves
in in this fight there's lots of work to
do so I think it's it's obvious you know
what the tasks and challenges are ahead
of us and um who the oppressors are and
and what kind of fight that's going to
be brought to our doorstep um but maybe
as we end the conversation uh we can end
on a on a note for Hope or or maybe not
so I'll ask a two-part question and I'll
just ask you first is there hope for
onchain privacy um in the US and I guess
also globally like do we have hope oh
yeah absolutely right we we have the
technical solution like Wabi
specifically as the coin joint protocol
is is is an absolutely beautiful
solution we might be able to find units
here and there but the tech is there um
and you know technology comes uh in in
front or or before uh culture right and
once technology of Anonymous based money
transfer uh exists then people will use
it and and culture will change and and
politics uh eventually too uh that's
that's the beautiful thing of free and
open source software like once the cat
is out of the bag be hard to put it back
in and that's the case for bigcoin as as
a base money technology it's the case
for coinjoin as as a privacy base money
Tech and that's the same for all the lar
twos and layer 3es and and and what's
not to come um the uh plus you know the
the the speed and uh acceleration ation
of of progress uh has uh definitely
improved and and picked up uh and
nowadays we we see so so many radical
new ways of of looking at Bitcoin and
and using it um that I'm I'm dreem um
you know governments and and the state
are are in the way but so are they
always uh I guess what the cipher Punk
have have really figured out is this
asymmetry of of power right that we
simply make defense ridiculous cheap and
we make attack ridiculous expensive and
then we ship it to a billion people and
that's it so I'm I think we're on a very
brilliant directory uh of of uh yeah
ensuring human prosperity and uh the
tech is basically ready with a little
bit of fine-tuning and and Engineering
on top uh and we can ship it uh to
billions um and we will so throughout
the next couple years and I think then
the world will be quite a different
place so final question um we have
Bitcoin ETFs we have institutions
adopting this onto their balance sheet
we have uh ordinals and runes on the
network which make for fungible tokens
on on bitcoin as a commodity Network um
we have all these really great things
that are happening with Bitcoin so what
kind of excites you the most looking
forward is it like L2 Solutions is it
new and Innovative uses of tech of this
Bitcoin technology is it companies final
companies and governments even finally
adding this to their sheets um if you
had to choose one thing what ites you
most about Bitcoin looking forward oh
really really diff difficult question of
course um on on the tech side I I would
say zero knowledge proofs right this is
probably the one area that that even
Satoshi mentioned like you know we
should pay attention to this because we
can probably make it a lot better than
what we do with um and we're starting to
see this where where Advanced Z
knowledge systems are much more um
approachable scalable uh verifiable um
easier to implement and such uh and you
know this already shows numerous um yeah
numerous good progress so um and and
there I guess specifically bit VM is one
interesting part of uh Bitcoin Network
to to basically add full Turing
completeness um uh to the script
execution environment with some crazy
genius trick um that that really again
just shows that we have no idea what
Bitcoin is and it will take us decades
to find out what we have actually
discovered here and how to use it um
that yeah we have a lot to learn uh that
that's for sure and I think also that in
in quite some time we we will look back
at our early days of of making
blockchain transactions in in horror of
how inefficient and and Reckless and not
private it was um and you know there
will at least be um some time for you
know the future uh um like
archaeologists uh to to go into the old
blocks and and see what craziness was
happening as we were bootstrapping this
network um but yeah uh lots of lots of
things technically excited to be love it
and Max if uh anybody wants to get in
contact with you what's the best best
way that they can yeah towards
liberty.com uh this is also where you
can send me uh mails notes and SATs Max
at towards liberty.com that's probably
another thing I'm bullish on is Noster
um a new private public hey pair based
uh Communications layer let's say uh and
here again Max at towards liberty.com is
uh where you can find my pup key um
that's where I do most of my posting
nowadays Max awesome thank you so much
for taking the time to chat with us it
was super fun to delve into the fight of
for private
the fight for a fair and free money um
both the pitfalls and the things to look
forward to uh I had a blast chatting
with you likewise still an excellent
questions and keep it up with the show
see you on the next one cheers well what
did you think of that conversation I
thought it was very interesting to delve
into the cyppher punk ethos of creating
tyranny free digital systems and how Max
thought the ciper punk ideology was more
alive today than ever it was also
fascinating to learn more more about
Max's insights into how Bitcoin has
privacy Solutions inherently baked into
the network and that we just have to
figure out unique ways to leverage them
and despite the fact that nation states
around the world are trying to clamp
down on privacy preserving onchain
solutions that there's still reasons for
Hope in the Technologies and the people
that are building them to keep up to
date with the podcast head over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had in the
show please consider showing support by
liking sharing rating and reviewing this
episode every rate review like share
really helps us get the podcast in front
of more ears and eyes and of course if
you're a neot token holder please
consider voting for Neo news today as
your Council representative we've
proudly been serving the Neo ecosystem
since 2017 and we'll continue to do so
by putting portions of our Council
rewards directly back into ecosystem
growth initiatives with all that said
thank you so much for taking the time to
listen to this episode of the smart
economy podcast and we're already
looking forward to catching you on the
next one